README.md, before:

# FIRECAM
[FIRECAM](https://globalfires.earthengine.app/view/firecam): Fire Inventories - Regional Evaluation, Comparison, and Metrics

FIRECAM is an explorer for regional differences in fire emissions from five global fire emissions inventories:
1. Global Fire Emissions Database ([GFEDv4s](https://www.globalfiredata.org/); van der Werf et al., 2017)
2. Fire Inventory from NCAR ([FINNv1.5](http://bai.acom.ucar.edu/Data/fire); Wiedinmyer et al., 2011)
3. Global Fire Assimilation System ([GFASv1.2](http://gmes-atmosphere.eu/about/project_structure/input_data/d_fire/); Kaiser et al., 2012)
4. Quick Fire Emissions Dataset ([QFEDv2.5r1](https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/research/science_snapshots/global_fire_emissions.php); Darmenov and da Silva, 2013)
5. Fire Energetics and Emissions Research ([FEERv1.0-G1.2](https://feer.gsfc.nasa.gov/data/emissions/); Ichoku and Ellison, 2014)

FIRECAM can be accessed through 1) Earth Engine Apps and 2) Google Earth Engine playground.

## Public Apps
(*Earth Engine Apps, no Google Earth Engine account required*)
<br><br>
![banner image](https://github.com/tianjialiu/FIRECAM/blob/master/docs/imgs/FIRECAM.jpeg)

### Step 1: Time Range
*Select a time range* Use the start year and end year sliders to select a time range for the annual and monthly regional emissions time series charts.

### Step 2: Region
*Select a region.* Choose one of 14 "basis" regions, based on GFEDv4s (van der Werf et al., 2017).
<br><br>
![banner image](https://github.com/tianjialiu/FIRECAM/blob/master/docs/imgs/basisRegions.png)

### Step 3: Species
*Select a species.* The six available species are CO<sub>2</sub>, CO, CH<sub>4</sub>, organic carbon (OC), black carbon (BC), and fine particulate matter (PM<sub>2.5</sub>)

### Regional Emissions
After clicking the submit button, please wait a few seconds for the default map layers and three charts to display. Note that for large regions, such as BOAS, and long time ranges, calculations for the monthly and annual time series can take up to a few minutes. The three charts (annual average from 2003-2016 and two time series charts, yearly and monthly emissions by inventory), can be viewed in a new tab and exported as tables or images. Map layers consist of emissions at 0.5° x 0.5° spatial resolution for a given species for each of the five global fire emissions inventories and fire relative fire confidence metrics at 0.25° x 0.25° spatial resolution. The distribution of peatlands (0.25° x 0.25°), based on GFEDv4s emissions from 2003-2016, and MODIS land use/land cover map (500 m, MCD12Q1 C6), based on FINNv1.0 aggregated vegetation classes, are also available as map layers.
<br><br>

## Google Earth Engine Code Editor GUI
(*Google Earth Engine account required*)
### Step 1: Sign up for a free Google Earth Engine account
Google Earth Engine ([GEE](https://earthengine.google.com/)) is a powerful cloud-computing platform for geospatial analysis and capable of computations with petabyte-scale datasets. To sign up, simply fill out a [form](https://signup.earthengine.google.com/) and wait for an email. GEE works best with the [Google Chrome web browser](https://www.google.com/chrome/).

### Step 2: The FIRECAM online tool repository
Copy and paste the following link in a tab in Google Chrome to enter the [GEE Javascript playground](https://code.earthengine.google.com/) and add the FIRECAM repository to your account under the read-only permissions folder in one step:
```
https://code.earthengine.google.com/?accept_repo=users/tl2581/FIRECAM
```
The repository should then appear in the top-left panel under 'Reader' as 'users/tl2581/FIRECAM'. The GEE Javascript playground is a code editor with a map and console to display or print results.

### Step 3: Diving into the GUI
Click the 'UI_FIRECAM.js' script in the 'users/tl2581/FIRECAM' repository. The script should appear in the code editor. Click 'Run' in the top-right corner of the code editor to activate the UI. The repository also contains two export scripts, one for the GFEDv4s basis regions and one for custom regions (e.g. country, continent).

## Publications
1. Liu, T., L.J. Mickley, R.S. DeFries, M.E. Marlier, M.F. Khan, M.T. Latif, and A. Karambelas (in prep). Diagnosing spatial uncertainties and relative biases in global fire emissions inventories: Indonesia as regional case study

2. van der Werf, G.R., J.T. Randerson, L. Giglio, T.T. van Leeuwen, Y. Chen, B.M. Rogers, M. Mu, M.J.E. van Marle, D.C. Morton, G.J. Collatz, R.J. Yokelson, and P.S. Kasibhatla (2017). Global fire emissions estimates during 1997-2016. *Earth Syst. Sci. Data* 9, 697–720. https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-9-697-2017

3. Wiedinmyer, C., S.K. Akagi, R.J. Yokelson, L.K. Emmons, J.J. Orlando, and A.J. Soja (2011). Model Development The Fire INventory from NCAR (FINN): a high resolution global model to estimate the emissions from open burning. *Geosci. Model Dev.* 4, 625–641. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-4-625-2011

4. Kaiser, J.W., A. Heil, M.O. Andreae, A. Benedetti, N. Chubarova,  L. Jones, J.J. Morcrette, M. Razinger, M.G. Schultz, M. Suttie, and G.R. van der Werf (2012). Biomass burning emissions estimated with a global fire assimilation system based on observed fire radiative power. *Biogeosciences* 9, 527–554. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-9-527-2012

5. Darmenov, A.S. and A. da Silva (2013). The Quick Fire Emissions Dataset (QFED) - Documentation of versions 2.1, 2.2, and 2.4, NASA Technical Report Series on Global Modeling and Data Assimilation, Volume 32. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.406.7724

6. Ichoku, C. and L. Ellison (2014). Global top-down smoke-aerosol emissions estimation using satellite fire radiative power measurements. *Atmos. Chem. Phys.* 14, 6643–6667. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-14-6643-2014

Commit message:

add description of fire metrics, rename metric 1

README.md, after:

# FIRECAM
[FIRECAM](https://globalfires.earthengine.app/view/firecam): Fire Inventories - Regional Evaluation, Comparison, and Metrics

FIRECAM is an explorer for regional differences in fire emissions from five global fire emissions inventories:
1. Global Fire Emissions Database ([GFEDv4s](https://www.globalfiredata.org/); van der Werf et al., 2017)
2. Fire Inventory from NCAR ([FINNv1.5](http://bai.acom.ucar.edu/Data/fire); Wiedinmyer et al., 2011)
3. Global Fire Assimilation System ([GFASv1.2](http://gmes-atmosphere.eu/about/project_structure/input_data/d_fire/); Kaiser et al., 2012)
4. Quick Fire Emissions Dataset ([QFEDv2.5r1](https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/research/science_snapshots/global_fire_emissions.php); Darmenov and da Silva, 2013)
5. Fire Energetics and Emissions Research ([FEERv1.0-G1.2](https://feer.gsfc.nasa.gov/data/emissions/); Ichoku and Ellison, 2014)

FIRECAM can be accessed through 1) Earth Engine Apps and 2) Google Earth Engine playground.

## Public Apps
(*Earth Engine Apps, no Google Earth Engine account required*)
<br><br>
![banner image](https://github.com/tianjialiu/FIRECAM/blob/master/docs/imgs/FIRECAM.jpeg)

### Step 1: Time Range
*Select a time range* Use the start year and end year sliders to select a time range for the annual and monthly regional emissions time series charts.

### Step 2: Region
*Select a region.* Choose one of 14 "basis" regions, based on GFEDv4s (van der Werf et al., 2017).
<br><br>
![banner image](https://github.com/tianjialiu/FIRECAM/blob/master/docs/imgs/basisRegions.png)

### Step 3: Species
*Select a species.* The six available species are CO<sub>2</sub>, CO, CH<sub>4</sub>, organic carbon (OC), black carbon (BC), and fine particulate matter (PM<sub>2.5</sub>)

### Regional Emissions
After clicking the submit button, please wait a few seconds for the default map layers and three charts to display. Note that for large regions, such as BOAS, and long time ranges, calculations for the monthly and annual time series can take up to a few minutes. The three charts (annual average from 2003-2016 and two time series charts, yearly and monthly emissions by inventory), can be viewed in a new tab and exported as tables or images. Map layers consist of emissions at 0.5° x 0.5° spatial resolution for a given species for each of the five global fire emissions inventories and fire relative fire confidence metrics (described below) at 0.25° x 0.25° spatial resolution. The distribution of peatlands (0.25° x 0.25°), based on GFEDv4s emissions from 2003-2016, and MODIS land use/land cover map (500 m, MCD12Q1 C6), based on FINNv1.0 aggregated vegetation classes, are also available as map layers.

### Relative Fire Confidence Metrics
| # | Metric | Range | Units | Description |
| :---: | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | BA-AFA Discrepancy | -1 to 1 | unitless | discrepancy between burned area (BA; MCD64A1) and active fire area (AFA; MxD14A1), calculated as a normalized index using the area of BA outside AFA and AFA outside BA |
| 2 | Cloud-Haze Obscuration | 0 to 1 | unitless | degree to which clouds and/or haze obscure the land surface from satellite observations of fires during fire-prone months |
| 3 | Burn Size/ Fragmentation | ≥ 0 | km<sup>2</sup> / fragment | average size of burned area per burn scar fragment (large, continuguous versus small, fragmented fire landscapes) |
| 4 | Topography Variance | ≥ 0 | m<sup>2</sup> | roughness in terrain, expressed as the variance in elevation across neighboring pixels (flat versus mountainous) |
| 5 | VIIRS FRP Outside MODIS Burn Extent | 0 to 1 | unitless | additional small fires from VIIRS (375 m), a sensor with higher spatial resolution than MODIS (500 m, 1 km) |

<br><br>

## Google Earth Engine Code Editor GUI
(*Google Earth Engine account required*)
### Step 1: Sign up for a free Google Earth Engine account
Google Earth Engine ([GEE](https://earthengine.google.com/)) is a powerful cloud-computing platform for geospatial analysis and capable of computations with petabyte-scale datasets. To sign up, simply fill out a [form](https://signup.earthengine.google.com/) and wait for an email. GEE works best with the [Google Chrome web browser](https://www.google.com/chrome/).

### Step 2: The FIRECAM online tool repository
Copy and paste the following link in a tab in Google Chrome to enter the [GEE Javascript playground](https://code.earthengine.google.com/) and add the FIRECAM repository to your account under the read-only permissions folder in one step:
```
https://code.earthengine.google.com/?accept_repo=users/tl2581/FIRECAM
```
The repository should then appear in the top-left panel under 'Reader' as 'users/tl2581/FIRECAM'. The GEE Javascript playground is a code editor with a map and console to display or print results.

### Step 3: Diving into the GUI
Click the 'UI_FIRECAM.js' script in the 'users/tl2581/FIRECAM' repository. The script should appear in the code editor. Click 'Run' in the top-right corner of the code editor to activate the UI. The repository also contains two export scripts, one for the GFEDv4s basis regions and one for custom regions (e.g. country, continent).

## Publications
1. Liu, T., L.J. Mickley, R.S. DeFries, M.E. Marlier, M.F. Khan, M.T. Latif, and A. Karambelas (in prep). Diagnosing spatial uncertainties and relative biases in global fire emissions inventories: Indonesia as regional case study

2. van der Werf, G.R., J.T. Randerson, L. Giglio, T.T. van Leeuwen, Y. Chen, B.M. Rogers, M. Mu, M.J.E. van Marle, D.C. Morton, G.J. Collatz, R.J. Yokelson, and P.S. Kasibhatla (2017). Global fire emissions estimates during 1997-2016. *Earth Syst. Sci. Data* 9, 697–720. https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-9-697-2017

3. Wiedinmyer, C., S.K. Akagi, R.J. Yokelson, L.K. Emmons, J.J. Orlando, and A.J. Soja (2011). Model Development The Fire INventory from NCAR (FINN): a high resolution global model to estimate the emissions from open burning. *Geosci. Model Dev.* 4, 625–641. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-4-625-2011

4. Kaiser, J.W., A. Heil, M.O. Andreae, A. Benedetti, N. Chubarova,  L. Jones, J.J. Morcrette, M. Razinger, M.G. Schultz, M. Suttie, and G.R. van der Werf (2012). Biomass burning emissions estimated with a global fire assimilation system based on observed fire radiative power. *Biogeosciences* 9, 527–554. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-9-527-2012

5. Darmenov, A.S. and A. da Silva (2013). The Quick Fire Emissions Dataset (QFED) - Documentation of versions 2.1, 2.2, and 2.4, NASA Technical Report Series on Global Modeling and Data Assimilation, Volume 32. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.406.7724

6. Ichoku, C. and L. Ellison (2014). Global top-down smoke-aerosol emissions estimation using satellite fire radiative power measurements. *Atmos. Chem. Phys.* 14, 6643–6667. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-14-6643-2014
